The Lore Book
Your trusty Adventurer's Diary. It never leaves your side.
Your trusty Adventurer's Diary. It's a bit scruffy and full of handwritten notes about your|adventures, but you can't imagine adventuring without it.
Your trusty Adventurer's Diary. Its gilded cover and smooth pages contain detailed diagrams,|notes, and information about your time in the Wizard's Lair. Not one thing has been left out|and you look forward to entrusting it to your descendants who will undoubtedly turn your|story into legend.
Dungeon Snake
The Dungeon Snake is a dangerous breed of snake exclusive to dungeons and lairs.
The Dungeon Snake is a dangerous breed of snake exclusive to dungeons and lairs. This breed of|snake is not your friend and resists most attempts at taming.
The Dungeon Snake is a dangerous breed of snake. It thrives in dungeon-like environments and|enjoys adventurers as its favourite meal, despite their high fat content and how difficult|they are to fully digest. Dungeon Snakes are fast and aggressive and will attempt to bite|adventurers with their powerful jaws. The snake is not especially venomous and most of its|victims fall prey to blood loss. Attempts to keep and breed Dungeon Snakes outside of their|preferred environments have all resulted in terrible accidents making them a rare choice of|pet.
Common Bat
A bat. These ones are uncommonly violent.
A bat. They are very common in dungeon environments. They are frustratingly difficult to hit|and very dangerous to new adventurers.
The common bat found in dungeons and lairs everywhere is thought to be a cursed ancestor to|the bats found in most barns and churches. This curse has made them larger, violent, and far|more dangerous. Some insist that there is a way to break this curse but the reality for most|adventurers is that it's easier to defeat them and move on. As they breed exceptionally quickly|it takes a lot of effort to keep their numbers under control and most lair owners introduce|dungeon snakes to hunt them and maintain a healthy dungeon eco-system.
Evil Puppet
A puppet whose strings are pulled from the darkness.
A puppet that has been animated to patrol and guard the halls of dungeons. Its strings|disappear into a shadow on the ceiling above it.
The nightmarish form of the Evil Puppet is particular to the halls of wizards who wish to stop|adventurers from getting in their way. Cutting their strings only slows them down and shining a|light on the shadows they disappear into has no effect. Dismemberment is the only way to truly|stop an Evil Puppet. They are limited to spaces with ceilings and overhead cover and are|unhindered by obstructions on the ground. Adventurers fleeing this horrific abomination should|attempt to find an open outdoor space as quickly as possible.
Ocellus
A Conjuration that sees what it needs to see.
The Ocellus is often the first sign that a lair or dungeon is being actively guarded. Fire is|known to be its natural counter, and weapons that work with fire are particularly effective.
The Ocellus is not native to this realm. Around four centuries ago a young wizard looked|through a portal and found that something on the other side was looking back. Years later they|perfected the art of calling an Ocellus forth and set about teaching other wizards how to do|so. Summoning and binding the Ocellus to a task is now considered basic magic for any aspiring|wizard. Due to its size the Ocellus is favoured for guard duty over spying, as a large floating|eye watching your every move is hard to miss.
Skeleton
A necromancer's first line of defence.
The first spell a necromancer has to master is to enchant and animate a skeleton. Its|supernatural counter is exposure to the powers of the holy and sacred.
When necromancy was in its infancy the presence of a skeleton indicated the presence of a|master. These days the Skeleton has little to no shock value and is considered a nuisance more|than it is considered terrifying. Human skeletons are the most commonly used skeleton for this|spell but advanced necromancers can also animate animal skeletons. A single skeleton is little to|worry about, but a horde of skeletons is still extremely dangerous; adventurers must take care|not to succumb to their attacks lest they become the next pile of bones for the wizard to|animate.
Ochre Jelly
An alchemical spill that dissolves all in its path.
The science of creating a coherent jelly is more of an art form. It thrives in warmer|environments as it is prone to freezing when exposed to cold, becoming brittle quickly.
The precise ingredients used to create an Ochre Jelly vary between each individual jelly, as|they are created whenever an alchemist really fails in their science. Intentional creation of|any jelly is difficult as getting the right level of consistency is a skill more practised in the|kitchen than in a lair, but with practice one can turn out an ochre jelly consistently by making|the right errors while creating an alchemical concoction. Alchemists that accidentally create an|ochre jelly are often its first victims, and beginners are often advised to keep their freezing|potions close at hand.
Snakeman
The rank and file of the snake Queen Euryale's army.
The army of snake people, with Queen Euryale at its head, has terrorised the land for years.|Rumour has it that they have made a pact with evil wizards, but no one knows why.
The snakemen that have come to call the wizard's lair home find little to their satisfaction.|While they are content to follow their queen, Euryale, they are still frustrated and angry.|This annoyance is taken out on any adventurer foolish enough to cross their path.|Queen Euryale has selected the strongest and fiercest of her soldiers to follow her, and these|mighty warriors pose a threat to even the most battle hardened adventurers. Loyal and brave,|these minions know little of their Queen's true motivations.
Phantom
More disturbing than a ghost is a ghost with sword and shield.
This ghostly apparition is cursed to carry out its mission at all costs, long after its corporeal|form has faded from this world. Holy powers quickly dispel this spirit.
Within necromancy two branches exist: one to animate the dead, and another to bind the soul|past its appointed hour. The Phantom Curse binds a soul to a task rendering it unable to|depart until after that task is completed. Some phantoms have been recorded to be thousands|of years old, guarding forgotten tombs long after their inhabitants have turned to dust. Once|created, a Phantom has a single minded focus on the task they are cursed to carry out; arming|themselves with any weapon they can find, and taking the weapons of those they have slain.
Watchman
An Ocellus masterfully attached to the body of a fallen gladiator.
These giants sit at the crossroads of several magical schools, proving that anything can be|accomplished with the right combination of spells, skills, and corpses.
In the age following the discovery of the Ocellus some felt that the potential of a large|floating eye was not being fully utilised. The resulting experiments wrecked several wizard's|lairs, towers, and dungeons, until one of them finally managed to create the abomination|cleverly dubbed "The Watchman". Alchemical bindings combine the strength of a fallen gladiator|with an ocellus' fantastic vision, leading to this paragon of lair defence. Caution is|recommended around these towering brutes and their classic weapons of the arena.
Beck Mushroom
A giant edible mushroom known for blocking dungeon paths.
These mushrooms were discovered and popularised as a mid-dungeon snack by the adventurer|Beck on an experimental gastro-tour of lairs and dungeons across the world.
This culinary miracle discovered by the adventurer Beck has restorative properties and an|incredibly pleasing taste. Following its discovery many attempts were made to cultivate Beck|Mushrooms outside of dungeons but they all completely failed. While this baffled experts, it was|later agreed that some combination of blood and magic is likely what gives them their prolific|size and restorative utility. The Beck Mushroom is notable as a rare, if not unique, example of|something within a dungeon or lair that is helpful and not at all dangerous.
Ice Elemental
Ice given form and bound using a special mask.
Arcane sigils inside the mask on this elemental stop the ice that forms its body from melting.|Extreme heat can still cause it severe difficulties.
To create an Ice elemental takes a significant amount of planning and skill. First, its body must|be sculpted from a block of ice. Secondly, A mask of binding is placed on the sculpture. This|mask allows the sculpture to move, hold its form, and follow basic instructions. As a living|embodiment of ice, it continuously cools its surroundings. Differences can also be noted between|elementals created from natural and magically formed ice; natural ice elementals are smoother|and more intelligent, whereas magical ice elementals are more angular and sturdy.
Fire Elemental
Fire given form and bound using a special mask.
Arcane sigils inside the mask on this elemental stop the flame from dissipating even after its|original fuel source has been exhausted. Ice-based weaponry quickly drains their heat.
Fire elementals are considerably more difficult to craft than ice elementals. Binding a fire with|a mask is considered near impossible due to its intangible nature. In comparison with the Ice|Elemental, the fire-typed version is as strong and as durable. It is capable of changing its|shape and moving through smaller openings. A Fire Elemental can also spread its flame to nearby|flammable objects. A lot of wizards prefer using fire elementals over ice elementals because|with care they can be useful in keeping a lair comfortably warm.
Displacer
A scavenger that uses special appendages to teleport threats to another location.
This wolf-like chimera has naturally grown magical abilities. Despite any assertions to the|contrary these cannot be tamed and bred with dogs.
When a displacer teleports an adventurer they are sent in a random direction and distance. This|has led to many stories about adventurers teleported into fatal situations, such as outside a|tower's walls or trapped underground. Beast handlers recommend avoiding them if at all possible,|and if not, goading the displacer into attempting to maul you; it is unlikely to teleport|something it considers prey. Because of the inherent difficulties and dangers in breeding and|nesting displacers, alchemists recommend creating a more stable and useful chimera instead.
Acid Jelly
A corrosive alchemical concoction capable of destroying equipment quickly.
Compared to the Ochre Jelly the Acid Jelly can dissolve metal and bone much faster. It has no|effect on golden equipment however.
Creation of an acid jelly is much easier than creating an ochre jelly and one of the more|consistent ways of creating an ochre jelly is by attempting to create an acid jelly. Originally|created by alchemists to mine gold by dissolving the rock around ore deposits, the idea was|quickly abandoned when retrieving the gold proved extremely dangerous and then had to be used|to contain the jelly afterwards. Since then, these expensive failures have been abandoned and|forgotten in the mineshafts they created, awaiting unwitting adventurers to release them.
Master Ocellus
A conjuration that sees more than enough.
From the same dimension as the Ocellus, the Master Ocellus has eyes that can see into its blind|spots. It retains the Ocellus' weakness to fire.
The life cycle of the Ocellus begins as an eye on the stalk of a Master Ocellus. As it grows it|draws nutrients from its parent until it grows large enough to detach and float independently.|As it matures its skin darkens and when it grows old enough it begins to sprout eye stalks|itself, becoming parent to a whole new generation of Ocellus. Early beliefs held that the|additional eye stalks of the Master Ocellus allowed it to see into the future, but this could|not be verified as a large floating eye is without the means to communicate what it can see.
Jabberwock
No one knows what manner of creature this is.
Descriptions of Jabberwock vary from region to region, leaving scholars unsure of its true|nature. Ancient poetry links the real Jabberwock to a legendary weapon.
Sightings of Jabberwock in recent days have largely been discredited as false due to the wildly|varied and inaccurate details provided by eye-witnesses. The ancient poetry about the|Jabberwock is largely considered to be nonsense as well. Common descriptions include claws and|jaws but cannot decide if the creature is mammalian, avian, insectoid, amphibian, or something|else entirely. Rumours of an enchanted weapon related to the creature are as varied as|descriptions of the creature; Whether it is needed to kill it or claimed from its corpse cannot|be verified.
Frog of War
A proud warrior frog, fully armed and trained the art of war.
No one is quite sure where these strange soldiers came from or why they fight in the wizard's|lair. They are incredibly dangerous and violent.
Frogs of war are taken from their spawn and raised on the art of bloodshed. As tadpoles they|are trained and as they mature they become fierce warriors. These soldiers follow a strict code|of conduct and believe ultimately in their own strength and ability to fight. Many who dismiss|them as “just frogs” soon learn just how fatal a mistake that is. While the frog nation is|considered quite peaceful Frogs of War defend it with an unnatural and unending bloodlust. When|they find an enemy they fly into an unstoppable rage, attacking all who cross their path.
Viper
The Dungeon Viper is the second, more deadly, variant of snake that resides in dungeons.
Also known as the lair snake, these snakes are venomous. They prefer to strike from hiding|while hunting. When confronted they will hiss and bluff to scare away foes.
When bitten by a snake dwelling in a dungeon it is important to be aware of the snake's colours.|As the old adventurer adage goes "Scales of green, keep it clean; Scales of red, already dead".|A more recent adventurer adage instead says "don't forget your antidotes". Other adventurers|say "don't get bit". A lot of adventurers have a lot to say on the subject of snakes,|sometimes at length. Most oft repeated is the line uttered by one of the most prominent of the|last generation of great adventurers, who said: "why does it always have to be snakes?"
Lich
A necromancer that has extended their life past death by becoming a lich.
Liches must drain the life force from others in order to maintain their undeath. They leave|their victims starved of energy and hungry. They are vulnerable to the powers of the holy.
In their obsession with death necromancers prepare for their own by cursing themselves to|undeath. The curse of the lich raises the necromancer with their will and magical ability intact|but only novice necromancers will use this curse on themselves as it comes with several severe|drawbacks. Over time a lich's body wastes away to bone but this can be staved off by feeding|on the life force of other people. A lich that has faded away to little more than a skeleton is|plagued by a deep sense of hunger, driving them insane and making them ravenously merciless.
Wraith
A necromancer that has extended their life past death by becoming a wraith.
Wraiths drain the energy of the soul from the living in order to preserve their existence,|causing random memory loss in their victims.  They are vulnerable to the powers of the holy.
Whilst related to the curse of the lich, the curse of the wraith is far more powerful. A|necromancer raised under the curse of the wraith retains their will and magical ability and also|gains the ability to drain the lives of others with far more efficiency than the curse of the|Lich, allowing them to restore flesh to their bones should they go long enough without a meal.|This draining power can take the steal the very essence of life from its targets. The victim's|experiences, hopes, dreams, and will are all consumed and turned into regenerative energy for|the Wraith.
Spectral Skeleton
A skeleton raised by a necromancer with special magic to make it more dangerous.
Within this skeleton is a single bone from a corpse, that gives the skeleton unusual powers.|These powers do not protect it from the blessings of the holy.
The process of creating a chimerical skeleton involves creating a chimera, killing it, and then|raising its skeleton. This process can even be used on failed chimerical creations, allowing for|strange composites of creatures that would not be able to survive as living chimera. Creating a|spectral skeleton follows the same basic principle. A necromancer must transplant a bone of a|corpse into a host, kill them, and then raise their skeleton. The discord in the bone taken|from a corpse reacts with the raising spell and enchants the other bones, creating a Spectral|Skeleton.
Minotaur
These creatures charge down labyrinth passageways at dangerous speeds.
Whether they are natural, chimerical, or outsiders of the realm is unknown. Fire is an effective|weapon against them, as it catches in their fur startlingly easily.
Frustratingly, very little is known about the minotaur species: They appear in some labyrinths,|but not others; they violently attack everyone they come across; they even collect their dead|and disappear without a trace. One attempt to build a labyrinth to attract them was such an|expensive failure that it was abandoned and condemned. Decades later it was discovered that|Minotaurs had taken residence in the old labyrinth, but it was too late and too dangerous to|try restarting the research that had been planned for these enormous bull-people.
Dragon
A great beast from ages past.
These creatures were thought to be extinct until viable dragon eggs were found in ancient lair.|They have an incredibly unpleasant demeanour.
One of the last great empires thrived on the skill of its alchemists and the wonder that was|dragonsbreath: a secretion from a gland in the throat of a dragon. The empire pushed dragons|to the brink of extinction before realising their dependence, but were unable to stop what|they had started. Dragons refused to breed in captivity and poachers hunted those left in the|wild, which resulted in their complete extinction. It is thought that some dragons managed to|survive and still roam the earth to this day, carefully hiding from humanity's greed.
Twisted Displacer
A starved and desperate displacer struggling to stay alive.
When backed into a corner, a displacer can turn its tentacles on itself and teleport away, but|this comes at a severe cost to its own well-being.
Displacers have a voracious appetite and are constantly on the move searching for their next|meal. Hunger warps a displacer's mind and abilities, and twists it into something much more|dangerous. A starving displacer will teleport itself, leaving behind a clone of itself which it can|then hunt for food. As it eats it becomes addicted to its own meat, teleporting itself and|hunting the clone whenever it gets even the slightest bit hungry. Anything else that crosses a|Twisted Displacer's path is just teleported away and ignored, or viciously murdered and left to|rot.
Magesteel Jelly
An animate puddle of magesteel that is keen to not get caught.
Magesteel Jelly, once caught and killed, can be used to forge especially effective equipment|which is in turn incredibly effective against magesteel jelly.
At the pinnacle of the alchemical art is the creation of magesteel, among other things it|requires a fine and delicate touch and a ready supply of dragonsbreath. Unfortunately, its|recipe is now forgotten, dragons are gone, and dragonsbreath is unavailable. On occasion an|adventurer returns from a lair or dungeon swearing on the heavens that they witnessed a|puddle of metal slip away before their eyes. Those in the know about such things recognise the|metal as unworked magesteel: a puddle of Magesteel Jelly.
Euryale
The Queen of the Snakemen, Euryale.
Given her larger size and strength, Queen Euryale commands extreme force which she directs at|her foes with savage fury.
As with most reptilian species, snakewomen are larger and stronger than their male|counterparts, and members of their royal family are especially large. Euryale is no exception.|She is the second sister of her clutch, and became Queen when her elder sister was killed in|battle against human adventurers. She is a fierce leader and distinguished warrior, and now|leads a contingent of warriors to strike back at humanity. Meanwhile, her homelands prepare for|a war of expansion, to claim nearby lands in the name of their great Queen Euryale.
Minotaur champion
Of minotaur, this one is especially experienced and dangerous.
The advanced strength and skill of minotaur champions does little to alleviate their weakness to|fire: their fur can be set ablaze with ease.
When minotaurs are killed in a labyrinth other minotaurs quickly appear to retrieve and|disappear with the body. In an attempt to obtain a corpse for study, an adventuring party held|out against minotaurs trying to recover their dead. After a long battle, they witnessed a much|larger and much more aggressive minotaur appear. The sole survivor of that adventuring party|described this minotaur champion as far better equipped than the others, better trained, far|more ferocious, and far more dangerous than any other minotaur seen before.
High Priest of Anarkhis
A wizard of Anarkhis, charged with guarding the Orbs of Chaos and Disorder.
Fully fledged wizards aiding the wizard Anarkhis in his foul plot. They are without mercy and|compassion and they will kill you.
When the wizard Anarkhis approached other wizards to charm them into servitude, he found that|some of them would pledge themselves to his cause without the need for mind-destroying magics.|These wizards were given more and more power by Anarkhis and worshipped him as if he were a|god. As Anarkhis' priests they sought contracts with supernatural creatures and conducted|ancient rites in his name; those most able became high priests and were given the most sacred|task of protecting the barriers leading to Anarkhis himself.
The Wizard Anarkhis
The foul wizard found in the depths of the Wizard's Lair.
Using magic fuelled by pure hatred and spite he will flay your bones and fashion grimoires from|your skin.
When a wizard achieves mastery of their chosen school of magic it is not uncommon for them to|seek instruction in other areas. When a wizard achieves mastery of all acceptable schools of|magic they are revered as a master of the art, and can take the title of archmage. The wizard|Anarkhis is one such archmage, but the seed of evil in his heart led him to study and master|forbidden magic, which he now has turned on the land. With the power at his command he is|capable of great evil, death, and destruction. The Wizard Anarkhis must die!
Daniel
He entered the lair on a holy mission, now he is just another of its cursed inhabitants.
Said to be protected by the gods, but in truth his ability to withstand any blow comes from the|legendary Warmaster Armour he wears.
As a crusader, Daniel was said to be amongst the most devout believers. As a warrior he was|peerless. Entrusted with the most dangerous and most difficult missions, he was sent to|infiltrate the Wizard's Lair and defeat its dark master, Anarkhis. He fought his way bravely|into its depths but not even the legendary Warmaster Armour could protect him from the|madness that seeped into his soul; he turned on his allies and became yet another dangerous|enemy on the path to defeating the wizard Anarkhis.
Dalton
As a mercenary and bounty hunter he hoped to claim the reward for Anarkhis' head.
Rumoured to be able to defeat any enemy with a single blow, his strength doesn't come from|training or skill, but the legendary Warmaster Sword he wields.
When his parents were killed by bandits and he was kidnapped, he fell in with the mercenaries|that rescued him. Ever since he has honed his skill with the blade and hunted down those that|would tread on the weak and oppressed. When he ventured forth to defeat the dark wizard|Anarkhis his friends begged him not to go, but he would not be deterred. The wizard's trickery|has left him trapped within his lair and Dalton has lost his mind to paranoia, attacking everyone|and everything that crosses his path.
Warmaster
A cursed warlord, still wandering the world a thousand years after his time.
Drawn to the power of the Warmaster Sword and Armour, he hopes for an ancient prophesy to|come true; one that will grant him eternal rest.
While the gods still intervened in the world and meddled in the affairs of mortals, one warlord|by the name of Devlin impressed them so much that they gave him a holy mission. He had to kill a|child who would grow to become the Warmaster; one who could kill the gods themselves. When he|stated that killing the child would only birth more war, they cursed him to live until he could be|given a true warriors death at the hands of a Warmaster. Since then he has lived to hunt|Warmasters in the hopes that one day he will fall at their hands.
A Brief History of the Realm
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
When the gods made people they were hoping to breed the perfect servants. Created with an|innate connection to the magical and divine people became so much more than that. Fearing what|humanity had become the gods subjected people to difficult conditions where the only option|was to be subservient to the gods. When a great wizard created weapons and armour that could|defy the gods humanity strove to build their own world. The gods were dismissed by the first|Warmaster and an age of prosperity ensued. Humanity flourished. Centuries later, a wizard|learned a terrible secret from forbidden magic and became the Wizard Anarkhis. Anarkhis|brought forth an age of darkness that humanity suffers to this day, unleashing monsters and|magic on the innocent.
The Legend of Warmaster
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
When the gods learned of humaity's betrayal they sought to end the threat by killing the child|that would grow up to kill them. They called to themselves a great warlord and tasked him with|killing the child, but when he reached her he couldn't do it. The girl grew up protected by the|warlord, learning all she could from him about the art of war. She amassed an army and struck|down the gods, becoming the first Warmaster. Since then many have sought to claim the title for|themselves and emulate her greatness. The last Warmaster was slain by the Wizard Anarkhis in|an ambush and the Warmaster Armour and Warmaster Sword were lost, which is considered the|true start of the age of darkness, where Anarkhis' power became absolute.
1001 Recipes for Mushrooms
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
During a recent study of old quest logs recovered from popular adventuring locations it was|discovered that a great many adventurers have some kind of recipe for turning the humble|mushroom into a more filling and appealing ration. Given the ubiquitous nature of the Beck|Mushroom in and around dungeons, adventurers have ample opportunity to try out new recipes.|If you happen to have a mushroom and discover an old quest log, be sure to flick through the|pages and try out any recipes you might find! Of course, if you'd rather glean other|information from their pages be sure to eat your mushrooms before reading as adventurers|find it hard to resist the allure of an exciting new recipe!
Excalibur
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
The gods granted a boon to the warlord they sent to kill the first Warmaster: a sword blessed|with their divine light which they named Excalibur. When the warlord reached his target and made|his fateful decision to defy the gods he went to a nearby lake and threw Excalibur into it.|Since then the sword has been lost. Interestingly, some adventurers claim that the scroll|containing the Chance spell has the ability to swap your weapon with one of comparable power.|They claim that the enchanted long swords they had were replaced with a divine weapon of holy|power when they used the scroll. These adventurers claim that the sword they obtained was|Excalibur itself, but as a legendary weapon there is no way to prove it one way or another.
After the Wizard's Lair
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
(Is there more to the Wizard's Lair?)
Many adventurers claimed to have killed the Wizard Anarkhis but his lair persisted leaving many|sure that his true self still remained within. It was only when a hero emerged equipped with the|Warmaster Armour and Warmaster Sword and the lair began to crumble that it was certain that|the wizard had finally been defeated. It was not long after that the Queen and her royal guard|had organised an army strong enough to drive out what monsters and horrors remained and|bring peace to land once more. With the Wizard's Lair conquered the hero left the land, looking|to new challenges and adventures elsewhere.