Languages go in this folder. Don't delete !English.lng or you'll break the game.
Unlike other languages it is hardcoded as default to fill out the script when first starting the game.

Have a custom language file that you want included with an update? I'm pretty open to this idea.
Want to translate the game to a language not covered by the game's default character set?
Contact me by email - david@wizardslair.co.uk - with subject "Translation: Rising Runner" and we can take it from there.

To override the in-game font with one of your own (for not-ASCII(ISO-8859-15 compatible)-standard character sets) place an image(see example.png) with the same name as your language file.

EXAMPLE:
Your language file is japanese. It should have a PNG with the same name. If you want variable widths, create a .dat file - Place all of these in this folder labeled as below.
Japanese.lng - The language file that requires a custom font
Japanese.png - The custom font that should be used. The game expects that all glyphs are 8x8 and the entire image is 128x128 in a standard PNG format.
Japanese.dat - A 256-byte file containing 1-byte widths(00-FF) of every character in the set.
If you're having trouble getting the .dat file made, contact me and I will arrange to make one for you.

Example.png is an example of which characters you can safely use - Edit only green tiles! The rest are used by core elements of the game and should not be edited.
To best match the style of the game, your font should be :
White with a black drop shadow.
Use 1-bit Alpha transparency for all unused pixels(don't use a mask colour!)
No larger than 7x7 pixels(use that last pixel of space for the shadow!).
Should not use the colour control character (that's the chevron character - ^ - signified by a palette icon in the example png).
Should not use unnecessary line breaks (signified by a bar - | - looks like an "enter" key in the example png).
Should not use "Character 255" (icon is an X in the example png) - it is used in some places in lieu of nothing.

Following all these rules will make for a happy font!

If you think your translation is good enough for inclusion with the main game, please share it with me and I will review it and let you know.

CREDITS FOR LANGUAGE FILES:

English : David Williams (@magic_bane, http://devlin.itch.io) < this is me!

French : Lore Studio (@lorestudio, http://lorestudio.fr)

German : Thomas Faust (@someindiegames, http://buysomeindiegames.com/)